README.md, before:

# getopt

## SYMOPSIS

### Tokenizer

```go
getopt.Tokenize(os.Args(), "hVi:o:f::p") ([]getopt.Option, error)
```

### Parser

```go
opts := getopt.New().WithDefaults("MyProg", "v1.0", "Usage: [opts] [file...]", ...)
nums := opts.IntList('n', "--num", "number of iterations")
...
positional, err := opts.Parse(os.Args, true)
```

### Marshaller

```go
type myStruct struct {
Names []string  `flag:"n,names" help:"name (may be repeated"`
Show func (arg string) error `flas:"S,show" help:"show status for arg"`
...
}

ms := myStruct{}
opts := getopt.New().WithDefaults("MyProg", "v1.0", "Usage: [opts] [file...]", ...)
positional, err := opts.Marshal(&ms, os.Args, true)
```

## DESCRIPTION

One more getopt implementation for golang.

- tokenizer supports standard getopt specifications string, including modes of:
    - posixly correct
    - parse positionals as arguments
    - suppress error reporting to stderr
    - allows flag concatenations (like ls -alt or tail -n100)
- high-level option configuration
    - follows POSIX standard to print help or version to STDOUT
    - gives more flexibility on what to pring in help
    - requires two dashes and = for long options
- high level struct marshalling
    - list support
    - callback function support

## USAGE

### As tokenizer

````
  if opts, err := getopt.Tokenize(os.Args(), "hVi:o:f::p") ; err == nil {
    for opt := range opts {
      switch opt.Opt {
        case "-h": help()
        case "-i": parseInpot(opt.Arg())
        ...
      }
    }
  }
````

where opt is []interface{Opt() string, Arg() *string}

Opt contains option in form "-l" or "-x" (even if merged form of "-lx"
was used in argument list). Arg may be nil for flags. For positional arguments opt is empty.

Long options are reported as positional parameters
(same as regular getopt would behave).

### Rich form

````
  opts := getopt.New().WithDefaults("MyProg","v1.0","Usage: [opts] [file...]", ...)
  opts.SetErrorHandler(...)
  
  input, _ := opts.StringValue('i', "--input", true, "Input file name")
  output, _ := opts.StringDefault('o', "--output", "/dev/stdout", "Output file name")
  dbs, _ := opts.StringList('d', "--db", "List of databases to query")
  
  if (args, err := opts.Parse(os.Args(), false); err == nil {
      if opts.Done() {
          os.Exit(0) // There was help or version used - EX_OK
      }
      for _, arg : range args {
          ....
      }
  } else {
      os.Exit(64) // EX_USAGE
  }
  ...
````

Highlights

- AddDefaults adds -h, -V, --help, and --version flags
    - Help is auto-generated, uses description provided as header
    - Help and Version are reported to stdout
- check opts.Done() to exit on errors or Help/Version request

Supported following configurators:

- ArgFunc(flag rune, longopt string, action func(string) error, help string) error
- FlagFunc(opt rune, longopt string, action func() error, help string) error
- Flag(opt rune, longopt, help []string) (*bool, error)
- &lt;type>Value(opt rune, longopt string, required bool, help []string) (*&lt;type>, error)
- &lt;type>Default(opt rune, longopt string, defaultValue &lt;type>, help []string) (*&lt;type>, error)
- &lt;type>List(opt rune, longopt string, help []string) (*[]&lt;type>, error)

Where <type> is one of:

- String // *string or *[]string
- Int // *int64 or *[]int64
- Uint // *uint64 or *[]uint64
- Float // *float64 or *[]float64
- Bool // *bool

Each function also has variant

- &lt;type>&lt;variant>V(flags[]rune, longopts[]string, ...)
  to allow synonyms; for example
- StringListV(flags[]rune, longopts[]string, help string) (*[]string, error)

For unsigned integers, input format supports

- decimals,
- octals /0[0-7]+/,
- hexadecimals /0x[0-9a-fA-F]+/,
- binary /0b[01]+/,
- base32 /0t[0-9A-Va-v]*/,
- base64 /0s[0-9a-zA-Z/+]={0,2}/.

### Marshaller

For a struct passes by pointer, for public fields that have annotation "flag", sets up parser with all short and long
flahs. One-letter become short, rest become long. Bool are flags only (no args supported).

Supports same types as rich form does, plus:

- int
- uint
- float32
- time.Time // in RFC3339
- time.Duration
- func () error // flag callback, has to be not nil
- func (val string) error // flag with arg callback, has to be not nil

In addition to scalar and vector (repeatable) types,

- map[string]&lt;type> are supported (in form like --map-item=key:value -Mkey1:value1)

Example:

```go
type testMarshal struct {
    Flag      bool               `flag:"b,boolean" help:"boolean value"`
    Str       string             `flag:"s,str" help:"string value"`
    StrList   []string           `flag:"S,str-list" help:"string list"`
    StrMap    map[string]string  `flag:"M,str-map" help:"string map (-Mkey:val -M k:v --str-map=ky:vl)"`
    Int       int64              `flag:"i,int-val" help:"integer value"`
    IntList   []int64            `flag:"I,int-list" help:"integer list"`
    IntMap    map[string]int     `flag:"int-map" help:"integer map"`
    Uint      uint64             `flag:"u,uint-val" help:"unsigned int value"`
    UintList  []uint64           `flag:"U,uint-list" help:"unsigned int list"`
    UintMap   map[string]int     `flag:"uint-map" help:"unsigned integer map"`
    Float     float64            `flag:"f,float-val" help:"float value"`
    FloatList []float64          `flag:"F,float-list" help:"float list"`
    FloatMap  map[string]float64 `flag:"float-map" help:"float map"`
    Wait      time.Duration      `flag:"d,duration-val" help:"duration value"`
    WaitList  []time.Duration    `flag:"D,duration-list" help:"duration list"`
    Exec      func (string) error `flag:"x,exec" help:"execute cmd"`
    Show      func() error       `flag:"show" help:"show stats"`
}
```

All arguments are treated as optional.  
Fields initialized prior to call are not changed if flag did not appear in command line.

# EOF

Commit message:

Added default and env tags to marshaller

README.md, after:

# getopt

## SYMOPSIS

### Tokenizer

```go
getopt.Tokenize(os.Args(), "hVi:o:f::p") ([]getopt.Option, error)
```

### Parser

```go
opts := getopt.New().WithDefaults("MyProg", "v1.0", "Usage: [opts] [file...]", ...)
nums := opts.IntList('n', "--num", "number of iterations")
...
positional, err := opts.Parse(os.Args, true)
```

### Marshaller

```go
type myStruct struct {
    Names []string  `flag:"n,names" help:"name (may be repeated"`
    Show func (arg string) error `flas:"S,show" help:"show status for arg"`
    ...
}

ms := myStruct{}
opts := getopt.New().WithDefaults("MyProg", "v1.0", "Usage: [opts] [file...]", ...)
positional, err := opts.Marshal(&ms, os.Args, true)
```

## DESCRIPTION

One more getopt implementation for golang.

- tokenizer supports standard getopt specifications string, including modes of:
    - posixly correct
    - parse positionals as arguments
    - suppress error reporting to stderr
    - allows flag concatenations (like ls -alt or tail -n100)
- high-level option configuration
    - follows POSIX standard to print help or version to STDOUT
    - gives more flexibility on what to pring in help
    - requires two dashes and = for long options
- high level struct marshalling
    - list support
    - callback function support
    - defaults support
    - initialization from environment variables support

## USAGE

### As tokenizer

````
  if opts, err := getopt.Tokenize(os.Args(), "hVi:o:f::p") ; err == nil {
    for opt := range opts {
      switch opt.Opt {
        case "-h": help()
        case "-i": parseInpot(opt.Arg())
        ...
      }
    }
  }
````

where opt is []interface{Opt() string, Arg() *string}

Opt contains option in form "-l" or "-x" (even if merged form of "-lx"
was used in argument list). Arg may be nil for flags. For positional arguments opt is empty.

Long options are reported as positional parameters
(same as regular getopt would behave).

### Rich form

````
  opts := getopt.New().WithDefaults("MyProg","v1.0","Usage: [opts] [file...]", ...)
  opts.SetErrorHandler(...)
  
  input, _ := opts.StringValue('i', "--input", true, "Input file name")
  output, _ := opts.StringDefault('o', "--output", "/dev/stdout", "Output file name")
  dbs, _ := opts.StringList('d', "--db", "List of databases to query")
  
  if (args, err := opts.Parse(os.Args(), false); err == nil {
      if opts.Done() {
          os.Exit(0) // There was help or version used - EX_OK
      }
      for _, arg : range args {
          ....
      }
  } else {
      os.Exit(64) // EX_USAGE
  }
  ...
````

Highlights

- AddDefaults adds -h, -V, --help, and --version flags
    - Help is auto-generated, uses description provided as header
    - Help and Version are reported to stdout
- check opts.Done() to exit on errors or Help/Version request

Supported following configurators:

- ArgFunc(flag rune, longopt string, action func(string) error, help string) error
- FlagFunc(opt rune, longopt string, action func() error, help string) error
- Flag(opt rune, longopt, help []string) (*bool, error)
- &lt;type>Value(opt rune, longopt string, required bool, help []string) (*&lt;type>, error)
- &lt;type>Default(opt rune, longopt string, defaultValue &lt;type>, help []string) (*&lt;type>, error)
- &lt;type>List(opt rune, longopt string, help []string) (*[]&lt;type>, error)

Where <type> is one of:

- String // *string or *[]string
- Int // *int64 or *[]int64
- Uint // *uint64 or *[]uint64
- Float // *float64 or *[]float64
- Bool // *bool

Each function also has variant

- &lt;type>&lt;variant>V(flags[]rune, longopts[]string, ...)
  to allow synonyms; for example
- StringListV(flags[]rune, longopts[]string, help string) (*[]string, error)

For unsigned integers, input format supports

- decimals,
- octals /0[0-7]+/,
- hexadecimals /0x[0-9a-fA-F]+/,
- binary /0b[01]+/,
- base32 /0t[0-9A-Va-v]*/,
- base64 /0s[0-9a-zA-Z/+]={0,2}/.

### Marshaller

For a struct passes by pointer, for public fields that have annotation "flag", sets up parser with all short and long
flahs. One-letter become short, rest become long. Bool are flags only (no args supported).

Supports same types as rich form does, plus:

- int
- uint
- float32
- time.Time // in RFC3339
- time.Duration
- func () error // flag callback, has to be not nil
- func (val string) error // flag with arg callback, has to be not nil

In addition to scalar and vector (repeatable) types,

- map[string]&lt;type> are supported (in form like --map-item=key:value -Mkey1:value1)

Example:

```go
type testMarshal struct {
    Flag      bool               `flag:"b,boolean" help:"boolean value"`
    Str       string             `flag:"s,str" help:"string value"`
    StrList   []string           `flag:"S,str-list" help:"string list"`
    StrMap    map[string]string  `flag:"M,str-map" help:"string map (-Mkey:val -M k:v --str-map=ky:vl)"`
    Int       int64              `flag:"i,int-val" help:"integer value"`
    IntList   []int64            `flag:"I,int-list" help:"integer list"`
    IntMap    map[string]int     `flag:"int-map" help:"integer map"`
    Uint      uint64             `flag:"u,uint-val" help:"unsigned int value"`
    UintList  []uint64           `flag:"U,uint-list" help:"unsigned int list"`
    UintMap   map[string]int     `flag:"uint-map" help:"unsigned integer map"`
    Float     float64            `flag:"f,float-val" help:"float value"`
    FloatList []float64          `flag:"F,float-list" help:"float list"`
    FloatMap  map[string]float64 `flag:"float-map" help:"float map"`
    Wait      time.Duration      `flag:"d,duration-val" help:"duration value"`
    WaitList  []time.Duration    `flag:"D,duration-list" help:"duration list"`
    Exec      func (string) error `flag:"x,exec" help:"execute cmd"`
    Show      func() error       `flag:"show" help:"show stats"`
}
```

Additionally, one can specify "default" and "env" tags.

- default will take the string value and marshal it before parsing command line.
- env will resolve OS environment variable by name, and if found, use the value as default.
  - when both are used, env, if found, takes precedence
  - for boolean values, "true" or "false" value is expected in default or as environment variable name

```golang
type mytype struct {
    Bool      bool       `vlag:"b,bool-val" help:"my boolean" env:"MY_BOOL"`
    Int       int64      `flag:"i,int-val" help:"integer value" default:"11" env:"MY_INT_VALUE"`
}

```

Besides, structure may be initialized before parsing (in this case, annotatijons take precedence)

All arguments are treated as optional.  
Fields initialized prior to call are not changed if flag did not appear in command line.

# EOF
